---
slug: Utho-access-google-drive
description: 'Connect your Utho running Ubuntu 14.04 to Google Drive seamlessly utilizing OCamlfuse, establishing a direct link with the Google Drive API for efficient access'
keywords: ["google", "drive", "console", "fuse", "apt", "ubuntu"]
tags: ["ubuntu"]
published: 2024-03-19
modified: 2024-03-19
modified_by:
    name: Pawan Kumar
title: 'Access Google Drive from Utho with Ubuntu 14.04'
authors: ["Pawan Kumar"]
---

Accessing Google Drive remotely can be incredibly convenient, especially when you need to access files from your Utho. This guide will walk you through installing and configuring a free tool called Google-drive-ocamlfuse (OCamlfuse) on your Utho running Ubuntu 14.04 or newer.

**OCamlfuse** leverages the Drive API to seamlessly access your Google Drive files. The setup process involves authorizing its use and integrating it with your Utho. Once installed and authorized, you'll have instant access to your Google Drive files from your Utho.

Before you begin, make sure you're familiar with our "Setting Up and Securing a Compute Instance" guide, especially if your Google Drive contains sensitive data. This guide assumes you're operating as a non-root user, though some steps may require sudo privileges.

## Install Software

To begin, we'll add the repository housing OCamlfuse to our Utho. After that, we'll update to ensure the changes take effect, and then proceed with the installation as usual.

1.  Add the repository source:

        sudo add-apt-repository ppa:alessandro-strada/ppa

2.  Update apt:

        sudo apt-get update

3.  Proceed with the application installation:

        sudo apt-get install google-drive-ocamlfuse

## Accessing the Google Drive API

Next, we'll enable API access to Google Drive and generate a set of credentials. Follow these steps using a web browser on your local computer and ensure you're logged into the Google account associated with your Drive:

1. Go to the Google API developer's console on your desktop by visiting https://console.developers.google.com/project

2.  Create a project by clicking on **Create Project**, then provide a name for the project and click **Create** once more.

    ![The new project window. I called my project Google Drive Utho]

Google will need some time to create the project. Once it's done, you'll be taken to the dashboard.

    ![The project "dashboard"]

3.  To enable the Google Drive API, go to **APIs & auth** and then select **APIs** from the expanded menu. You'll see a list similar to the one below. Locate **Drive API** and click on it:

    ![The API list.]

If you can't find the Drive API listed as shown, you might need to search for it. Once you've selected it, click on the blue Enable button located at the top of the page.

    ![The Google Drive API description.]

4.  Select **Credentials** from the menu on the left side of the page. Then, click on **Add New Credential**.

Click on **Configure consent screen**. Google requires some information about your application, assuming you're developing a piece of software.

The product name field is mandatory, but you can leave all other fields blank. After filling in the product name, click **Save** at the bottom of the page.

    ![Configuring the Google Drive API project. I named mine "Google Drive Utho link"]
    
Now, select **Other** as the application type. Google will prompt you to provide a name. You can either stick with the default option or choose a name that you'll easily recognize for this project. Once you've entered the name, click on **Create**.

    ![Selecting where this API key will be used]

Navigate to **Credentials** in the menu on the left side of the screen, and choose your project from the list. Here, you'll find your **Client ID** and **Client secret** strings displayed.

    ![The Client ID and Client secret strings generated by google.]

## Authorize OCamlfuse Access

Next, we'll give OCamlfuse the credentials for your Drive API in your Utho, granting it access to your Google Drive.

1.  Authorize your Google Drive connection by replacing client-ID and client-secret with the ones you obtained from the Google API Manager in the previous steps.

        google-drive-ocamlfuse -headless -label me -id client-ID -secret client-secret

After running this command, you'll receive a lengthy URL as output. Copy this URL and save it for use in step 2.

        Please, open the following URL in a web browser: https://accounts.google.com/o/oauth2/auth?client_id=URL_SNIPPED
        Please enter the verification code:

2.  Google will prompt you to grant permission for the new application (OCamlfuse) to access your Google Drive. Simply click on **Accept** to proceed and receive the verification code.

    ![The permission request screen from google.]

3.  Copy and paste the verification code back into OCamlfuse in your terminal.

## Select the Mount Location for Google Drive

To establish the location for Google Drive on your system, follow these steps to create an empty directory. This directory will serve as the destination for all your Google Drive files and folders.

1.  Create a mount point. The command below will create it in your home folder, but you can opt for a different path if desired:
        mkdir ~/google-drive

2.  Mounting Google Drive:

        google-drive-ocamlfuse -label me google-drive

Congratulations! You've successfully mounted your Google Drive. The directory named `google-drive` will now show all your Google Drive contents. The initial synchronization might take a few minutes, depending on the data on your drive. But once it's done, accessing your files will be almost instantaneous.

## Troubleshooting

If your Google Drive contents don't load automatically, it's probably due to expired credentials. If this occurs:

1.  To resolve this, visit **http://console.developers.google.com** on your local computer. If you've created other projects on the Developers Console, make sure to select the one you created earlier.

2.  Click **APIs & Auth**.

3.  Click **Credentials** from the menu on the left side of the page. From there, select the client ID from the list, which will be identified by your project name.

4.  Click **Reset secret**.

5.  Follow the same steps to authorize OCamlfuse access on your Utho.

6.  Re-mount your Google Drive:

        google-drive-ocamlfuse -label me google-drive
