---
slug: "Setting Up and Configuring OwnCloud on Debian 7"
description: "Mastering ownCloud: Setup and Tune-Up on Debian 7.4"
keywords: ["ownCloud", "Debian", "MySQL", "cloud storage"]
tags: ["debian", "lamp"]
modified: 2024-03-15
modified_by:
    name: Pawan Kumar
published: 2024-03-15
title: "Unleashing ownCloud: Setting Up on Debian 7"
title_meta: "How to Install and Configure ownCloud on Debian 7"
relations:
    platform:
        key: how-to-install-owncloud
        keywords:
            - distribution: Debian 7
deprecated: true
authors: ["Pawan Kumar"]
---
ownCloud is an open-source platform that simplifies access to files across various locations and devices. It works seamlessly with major operating systems and mobile devices, allowing you to store files on your Utho and access them from anywhere.

Setting up ownCloud on your Utho is straightforward. Follow the steps below to get started with a user-friendly drag-and-drop GUI interface. Consider utilizing our [Block Storage](/docs/products/storage/block-storage/) service for ample disk space with this setup.

## Installation Prerequisites

Before you dive into ownCloud on your Utho, make sure you have a functional LAMP (Linux, Apache, MySQL, and PHP) stack set up. If you need guidance on creating a LAMP stack, refer to our [LAMP Guides](/docs/websites/lamp/).

This guide is designed for non-root users. Commands needing elevated privileges are prefixed with `sudo`. If you're unsure about using `sudo`, take a look at [Users and Groups](/docs/guides/linux-users-and-groups/).

## Setting Up ownCloud

1.  To get the latest stable release of ownCloud, add the ownCloud repository to the apt source list. Start by creating a new list file:

        sudo touch /etc/apt/sources.list.d/owncloud.list

2.  Paste the following path into the file:

        deb http://download.opensuse.org/repositories/isv:/ownCloud:/community/Debian_7.0/ /

3.  Download the key linked with ownCloud:

        wget http://download.opensuse.org/repositories/isv:ownCloud:community/Debian_7.0/Release.key

4.  Add the key to allow apt to authenticate the files:

        sudo apt-key add - < Release.key

5.  Update your package lists by running:

        sudo apt-get update

6.  Install ownCloud:

        sudo apt-get install owncloud

7.  Enable HTTPS:

        sudo a2enmod ssl

8.  To apply the certificate and key generated by the ssl-cert package, utilize this command:

        sudo a2ensite default-ssl

9.  Restart the Apache service:

        sudo service apache2 reload

## Configure MySQL

As the LAMP stack employs MySQL, ownCloud can be configured to utilize this database instead of SQLite. However, you'll need to set up a database for ownCloud to utilize.

1.  Login to MySQL:

        mysql -u root -p

2.  Create a MySQL database by executing the following command:

        CREATE DATABASE owncloud;

In this example, "owncloud" is the name of the database. You're free to use any name you prefer.

3.  Grant privileges to the newly created database by executing the following command:

        GRANT ALL ON owncloud.* to 'owncloud'@'localhost' IDENTIFIED BY 'password';

Keep in mind that password is a variable, so feel free to set it to whatever you prefer.

4.  To exit MySQL, you can use either of the following commands:

        exit

    Or:

        quit

## Configuring ownCloud Settings

1.  Access ownCloud in a web browser using the Utho's IP address:

        12.43.65.85/owncloud

2.  Create an ownCloud account by providing a username and password.

3.  Click on **Advanced**, choose MySQL, and input the following details:

    -   User name
    -   Password
    -   Database Name
    -   Localhost

4.  Click the **Finish Setup** button.

## More Information

Feel free to refer to the following resources for more information on this topic. Although provided to assist you, please note that we cannot guarantee the accuracy or timeliness of externally hosted materials.

 - [ownCloud Administrator's Manual](http://doc.owncloud.org/server/6.0/admin_manual/installation/installation_source.html)
 - [Install Packages](http://software.opensuse.org/download.html?project=isv:ownCloud:community&package=owncloud)
